README.md, before:

# NAME

Devel::Optic - JSON::Pointer meets PadWalker

# SYNOPSIS

    use Devel::Optic;
    my $optic = Devel::Optic->new(max_size => 100);
    my $foo = { bar => ['baz', 'blorg', { clang => 'pop' }] };

    # 'pop'
    $optic->inspect('$foo/bar/-1/clang');

    # 'HASH: { bar => ARRAY ...} (1 total keys / 738 bytes). Exceeds viewing size (100 bytes)"
    $optic->inspect('$foo');

# DESCRIPTION

[Devel::Optic](https://metacpan.org/pod/Devel::Optic) is a [borescope](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Borescope) for
Perl programs.

It provides a basic JSON::Pointer-ish path syntax (a 'route') for extracting
bits of complex data structures from a Perl scope based on the variable name.
This is intended for use by debuggers or similar introspection/observability
tools where the consuming audience is a human troubleshooting a system.

If the data structure selected by the route is too big, it will summarize the
selected data structure into a short, human-readable message. No attempt is
made to make the summary machine-readable: it should be immediately passed to
a structured logging pipeline.

It takes a caller uplevel and a JSON::Pointer-style 'route', and returns the
variable or summary of a variable found by that route for the scope of that
caller level.

# METHODS

## new

    my $o = Devel::Optic->new(%options);

`%options` may be empty, or contain any of the following keys:

- `uplevel`

    Which Perl scope to view. Default: 1 (scope that `Devel::Optic` is called from)

- `max_size`

    Max size, in bytes, of a datastructure that can be viewed without summarization. Default: 5120.

- `scalar_truncation_size`

    Size, in `substr` length terms, that scalar values are truncated to for
    viewing. Default: 256.

- `scalar_sample_size`

    Size, in `substr` length terms, that scalar children of a summarized data
    structure are trimmed to for inclusion in the summary. Default: 64.

- `ref_key_sample_count`

    Number of keys/indices to display when summarizing a hash or arrayref. Default: 4.

## inspect

    my $stuff = { foo => ['a', 'b', 'c'] };
    my $o = Devel::Optic->new;
    # 'a'
    $o->inspect('$stuff/foo/0');

This is the primary method. Given a route, It will either return the requested
data structure, or, if it is too big, return a summary of the data structure
found at that path.

## fit\_to\_view

    my $some_variable = ['a', 'b', { foo => 'bar' }, [ 'blorg' ] ];

    my $tiny = Devel::Optic->new(max_size => 1); # small to force summarization
    # "ARRAY: [ 'a', 'b', HASH, ARRAY ]"
    $tiny->fit_to_view($some_variable);

    my $normal = Devel::Optic->new();
    # ['a', 'b', { foo => 'bar' }, [ 'blorg' ] ]
    $normal->fit_to_view($some_variable);

This method takes a Perl object/data structure and either returns it unchanged,
or produces a 'squished' summary of that object/data structure. This summary
makes no attempt to be comprehensive: its goal is to maximally aid human
troubleshooting efforts, including efforts to refine a previous invocation of
Devel::Optic with a more specific route.

## full\_picture

This method takes a 'route' and uses it to extract a data structure from the
[Devel::Optic](https://metacpan.org/pod/Devel::Optic)'s `uplevel`. If the route points to a variable that does not
exist, [Devel::Optic](https://metacpan.org/pod/Devel::Optic) will croak.

### ROUTE SYNTAX

[Devel::Optic](https://metacpan.org/pod/Devel::Optic) uses a very basic JSON::Pointer style path syntax called
a 'route'.

A route always starts with a variable name in the scope being picked,
and uses `/` to indicate deeper access to that variable. At each level, the
value should be a key or index that can be used to navigate deeper or identify
the target data.

For example, a route like this:

    %my_cool_hash/a/1/needle

Traversing a scope like this:

    my %my_cool_hash = (
        a => ["blub", { needle => "find me!", some_other_key => "blorb" }],
        b => "frobnicate"
    );

Will return the value:

    "find me!"

A less selective route on the same data structure:

    %my_cool_hash/a

Will return that branch of the tree:

    ["blub", { needle => "find me!", some_other_key => "blorb" }]

Other syntactic examples:

    $hash_ref/a/0/3/blorg
    @array/0/foo
    $array_ref/0/foo
    $scalar

#### ROUTE SYNTAX ALTNERATIVES

The 'route' syntax attempts to provide a reasonable amount of power for
navigating Perl data structures without risking the stability of the system
under inspection.

In other words, while `eval '$my_cool_hash{a}->[1]->{needle}'` would
be a much more powerful solution to the problem of navigating Perl data
structures, it opens up all the cans of worms at once.

I'm open to exploring richer syntax in this area as long as it is aligned with
the following goals:

- Simple query model

    As a debugging tool, you have enough on your brain just debugging your system.
    Second-guessing your query syntax when you get unexpected results is a major
    distraction and leads to loss of trust in the tool (I'm looking at you,
    ElasticSearch).

- O(1), not O(n) (or worse)

    I'd like to avoid globs or matching syntax that might end up iterating over
    unbounded chunks of a data structure. Traversing a small, fixed number of keys
    in 'parallel' sounds like a sane extension, but anything which requires
    iterating over the entire set of hash keys or array indicies is likely to
    surprise when debugging systems with unexpectedly large data structures.

# SEE ALSO

- [PadWalker](https://metacpan.org/pod/PadWalker)
- [Mojo::JSON::Pointer](https://metacpan.org/pod/Mojo::JSON::Pointer)
- [Devel::Probe](https://metacpan.org/pod/Devel::Probe)

Commit message:

Summarization size threshold varies by platform.
After several rounds of CPAN tester feedback that this module's tests
fail on every architecture aside from x86_64 (that is, my laptop), it
has become apparent that the module needs to be a little smarter about
how Perl's memory footprint varies according to arch. In order to do so,
I've introduced an 'exemplar' large data structure that seems like
a sane max size.

Additionally, this commit introduces the 'diagnostic' param to Test2's
'like': future failed tests should be a little clearer.

README.md, after:

# NAME

Devel::Optic - JSON::Pointer meets PadWalker

# SYNOPSIS

    use Devel::Optic;
    my $optic = Devel::Optic->new(max_size => 100);
    my $foo = { bar => ['baz', 'blorg', { clang => 'pop' }] };

    # 'pop'
    $optic->inspect('$foo/bar/-1/clang');

    # 'HASH: { bar => ARRAY ...} (1 total keys / 738 bytes). Exceeds viewing size (100 bytes)"
    $optic->inspect('$foo');

# DESCRIPTION

[Devel::Optic](https://metacpan.org/pod/Devel::Optic) is a [borescope](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Borescope) for
Perl programs.

It provides a basic JSON::Pointer-ish path syntax (a 'route') for extracting
bits of complex data structures from a Perl scope based on the variable name.
This is intended for use by debuggers or similar introspection/observability
tools where the consuming audience is a human troubleshooting a system.

If the data structure selected by the route is too big, it will summarize the
selected data structure into a short, human-readable message. No attempt is
made to make the summary machine-readable: it should be immediately passed to
a structured logging pipeline.

It takes a caller uplevel and a JSON::Pointer-style 'route', and returns the
variable or summary of a variable found by that route for the scope of that
caller level.

# METHODS

## new

    my $o = Devel::Optic->new(%options);

`%options` may be empty, or contain any of the following keys:

- `uplevel`

    Which Perl scope to view. Default: 1 (scope that `Devel::Optic` is called from)

- `max_size`

    Max size, in bytes, of a data structure that can be viewed without
    summarization. This is a little hairy across different architectures, so this
    is best expressed in terms of Perl data structures if specified. The goal is to
    avoid spitting out subjectively 'big' Perl data structures to a debugger or
    log. If you're tuning this value, keep in mind that CODE refs are _enormous_
    (~33kb on `x86_64`), so basically any data structure with CODE refs inside
    will be summarized.

    Default: Platform dependent. The value is calculated by

        Devel::Size::total_size([ map { { a => [1, 2, 3, qw(foo bar baz)] } } 1 .. 5 ])

    ... which is ~3kb on `x86_64`, and ~160 bytes JSON encoded. This is an
    estimate on my part for the size of data structure that makes sense to export
    in raw format when viewed. In my entirely subjective opinion, larger data
    structures than this are too big to reasonably export to logs in their
    entirety.

- `scalar_truncation_size`

    Size, in `substr` length terms, that scalar values are truncated to for
    viewing. Default: 256.

- `scalar_sample_size`

    Size, in `substr` length terms, that scalar children of a summarized data
    structure are trimmed to for inclusion in the summary. Default: 64.

- `ref_key_sample_count`

    Number of keys/indices to display when summarizing a hash or arrayref. Default: 4.

## inspect

    my $stuff = { foo => ['a', 'b', 'c'] };
    my $o = Devel::Optic->new;
    # 'a'
    $o->inspect('$stuff/foo/0');

This is the primary method. Given a route, It will either return the requested
data structure, or, if it is too big, return a summary of the data structure
found at that path.

## fit\_to\_view

    my $some_variable = ['a', 'b', { foo => 'bar' }, [ 'blorg' ] ];

    my $tiny = Devel::Optic->new(max_size => 1); # small to force summarization
    # "ARRAY: [ 'a', 'b', HASH, ARRAY ]"
    $tiny->fit_to_view($some_variable);

    my $normal = Devel::Optic->new();
    # ['a', 'b', { foo => 'bar' }, [ 'blorg' ] ]
    $normal->fit_to_view($some_variable);

This method takes a Perl object/data structure and either returns it unchanged,
or produces a 'squished' summary of that object/data structure. This summary
makes no attempt to be comprehensive: its goal is to maximally aid human
troubleshooting efforts, including efforts to refine a previous invocation of
Devel::Optic with a more specific route.

## full\_picture

This method takes a 'route' and uses it to extract a data structure from the
[Devel::Optic](https://metacpan.org/pod/Devel::Optic)'s `uplevel`. If the route points to a variable that does not
exist, [Devel::Optic](https://metacpan.org/pod/Devel::Optic) will croak.

### ROUTE SYNTAX

[Devel::Optic](https://metacpan.org/pod/Devel::Optic) uses a very basic JSON::Pointer style path syntax called
a 'route'.

A route always starts with a variable name in the scope being picked,
and uses `/` to indicate deeper access to that variable. At each level, the
value should be a key or index that can be used to navigate deeper or identify
the target data.

For example, a route like this:

    %my_cool_hash/a/1/needle

Traversing a scope like this:

    my %my_cool_hash = (
        a => ["blub", { needle => "find me!", some_other_key => "blorb" }],
        b => "frobnicate"
    );

Will return the value:

    "find me!"

A less selective route on the same data structure:

    %my_cool_hash/a

Will return that branch of the tree:

    ["blub", { needle => "find me!", some_other_key => "blorb" }]

Other syntactic examples:

    $hash_ref/a/0/3/blorg
    @array/0/foo
    $array_ref/0/foo
    $scalar

#### ROUTE SYNTAX ALTNERATIVES

The 'route' syntax attempts to provide a reasonable amount of power for
navigating Perl data structures without risking the stability of the system
under inspection.

In other words, while `eval '$my_cool_hash{a}->[1]->{needle}'` would
be a much more powerful solution to the problem of navigating Perl data
structures, it opens up all the cans of worms at once.

I'm open to exploring richer syntax in this area as long as it is aligned with
the following goals:

- Simple query model

    As a debugging tool, you have enough on your brain just debugging your system.
    Second-guessing your query syntax when you get unexpected results is a major
    distraction and leads to loss of trust in the tool (I'm looking at you,
    ElasticSearch).

- O(1), not O(n) (or worse)

    I'd like to avoid globs or matching syntax that might end up iterating over
    unbounded chunks of a data structure. Traversing a small, fixed number of keys
    in 'parallel' sounds like a sane extension, but anything which requires
    iterating over the entire set of hash keys or array indicies is likely to
    surprise when debugging systems with unexpectedly large data structures.

# SEE ALSO

- [PadWalker](https://metacpan.org/pod/PadWalker)
- [Mojo::JSON::Pointer](https://metacpan.org/pod/Mojo::JSON::Pointer)
- [Devel::Probe](https://metacpan.org/pod/Devel::Probe)
